---
layout: post
title: Learning to test with Mocha
comments: true
---

# Learning to test with Mocha

In my journey with JavaScript, I've created a couple of React web apps, a good ol' fashioned static website (this one!), PWAs, and more. I realized, however, that I was missing possibly my favorite type of application: a CLI. I love how even with the powerful tools that we have to build graphical experiences across many platforms, hackers still have an affinity for text based applications. I started off with recreational (not for class) programming by building small Python CLIs as well, so I figured that for my next project I'd write a JavaScript CLI with Node.js. The final product is [`newpost`](https://jahz.co/newpost), a utility that lets you create Jekyll blog post files from the command line. The cool thing about `newpost` is that you can save commonly used front matter to a configuration object in package.json, so you don't have to copy/paste the same metadata from post to post. If you blog with Jekyll or GitHub Pages like I do, check it out!

I like holding myself to certain standards, and coding is no exception. Even though this is a pretty small and honestly probably pretty unknown project, I wanted it to have all the trappings of a real OSS project. Unfortunately, every OSS package worth its salt has some sort of test suite configuration, which is something that I have little to no experience with.

## Confession time

Yes, I know, it's shocking. I don't test my code! After realizing that my package's ["Quality"](https://npms.io/about) score wouldn't increase without testing, however, I decide that it was _sigh_ time to learn how to properly test my code.
